I am filled with deep emotion at finding myself standing in this place,
where were collected together the wisdom, the patriotism, the devotion
to principle, from which sprang the institutions under which we live.

You have kindly suggested to me that in my hands is the task of
restoring peace to our distracted country. I can say in return, sir,
that all the political sentiments I entertain have been drawn, so far as
I have been able to draw them, from the sentiments which originated in
and were given to the world from this hall. I have never had a feeling,
politically, that did not spring from the sentiments embodied in the
Declaration of Independence.

I have often pondered over the dangers which were incurred by the men
who assembled here and framed and adopted that Declaration. I have
pondered over the toils that were endured by the officers and soldiers
of the army who achieved that independence. I have often inquired of
myself what great principle or idea it was that kept this Confederacy so
long together. It was not the mere matter of separation of the colonies
from the motherland, but that sentiment in the Declaration of
Independence which gave liberty not alone to the people of this country,
but hope to all the world, for all future time. It was that which gave
promise that in due time the weights would be lifted from the shoulders
of all men, and that all should have an equal chance. This is the
sentiment embodied in the Declaration of Independence.

Now, my friends, can this country be saved on that basis? If it can, I
will consider myself one of the happiest men in the world if I can help
to save it. If it cannot be saved upon that principle, it will be truly
awful. But if this country cannot be saved without giving up that
principle, I was about to say I would rather be assassinated on this
spot than surrender it.

Now, in my view of the present aspect of affairs, there is no need of
bloodshed and war. There is no necessity for it. I am not in favour of
such a course; and I may say in advance that there will be no bloodshed
unless it is forced upon the government. The government will not use
force unless force is used against it.

My friends, this is wholly an unprepared speech. I did not expect to be
called on to say a word when I came here. I supposed I was merely to do
something toward raising a flag. I may, therefore, have said something
indiscreet. But I have said nothing but what I am willing to live by,
and, if it be the pleasure of Almighty God, to die by.