I have just read yours of the 19th instant, addressed to myself through
the "New York Tribune."

If there be in it any statements or assumptions of fact which I may know
to be erroneous, I do not now and here controvert them.

If there be in it any inferences which I may believe to be falsely
drawn, I do not now and here argue against them.

If there be perceptible in it an impatient and dictatorial tone, I waive
it, in deference to an old friend whose heart I have always supposed to
be right.

As to the policy I "seem to be pursuing," as you say, I have not meant
to leave any one in doubt. I would save the Union. I would save it in
the shortest way under the Constitution.

The sooner the national authority can be restored, the nearer the Union
will be,--the Union as it was.

If there be those who would not save the Union unless they could at the
same time save slavery, I do not agree with them.

If there be those who would not save the Union unless they could at the
same time destroy slavery, I do not agree with them.

_My paramount object in this struggle is to save the Union, and not
either to save or to destroy slavery._

If I could save the Union without freeing any slave, I would do it; if I
could save it by freeing all the slaves, I would do it; and if I could
save it by freeing some and leaving others alone, I would also do that.

What I do about slavery and the coloured race, I do because I believe it
helps to save the Union; and what I forbear, I forbear because I do not
believe it would help to save the Union.

I shall do less whenever I shall believe that what I am doing hurts the
cause; and I shall do more whenever I shall believe doing more will help
the cause.

I shall try to correct errors where shown to be errors, and I shall
adopt new views as fast as they shall appear to be true views.

I have here stated my purpose according to my views of official duty,
and I intend no modification of my oft-expressed personal wish that all
men everywhere could be free.