It has long been a grave question whether any government not too strong
for the liberties of its people, can be strong enough to maintain its
existence in great emergencies. On this point the present rebellion
brought our Republic to a severe test; and a presidential election,
occurring in regular course during the rebellion, added not a little to
the strain.

If the loyal people united were put to the utmost of their strength by
the rebellion, must they not fail when divided and partially paralyzed
by a political war among themselves? But the election was a necessity.
We cannot have free government without elections; and if the rebellion
could force us to forego or postpone a national election, it might
fairly claim to have already conquered and ruined us. The strife of the
election is but human nature practically applied to the facts of the
case. What has occurred in this case must ever occur in similar cases.
Human nature will not change. In any future great national trial,
compared with the men of this, we shall have as weak and as strong, as
silly and as wise, as bad and as good. Let us, therefore, study the
incidents of this as philosophy to learn wisdom from, and none of them
as wrongs to be revenged. But the election, along with its incidental
and undesirable strife, has done good too. It has demonstrated that a
people's government can sustain a national election in the midst of a
great civil war. Gold is good in its place, but living, brave, patriotic
men are better than gold.

But the rebellion continues; and now that the election is over, may not
all having a common interest reunite in a common effort to save our
common country? For my own part, I have striven and shall strive to
avoid placing any obstacle in the way. So long as I have been here, I
have not willingly planted a thorn in any man's bosom. While I am deeply
sensible to the high compliment of a re-election, and duly grateful as I
trust to Almighty God for having directed my countrymen to a right
conclusion, as I think, for their own good, it adds nothing to my
satisfaction that any other man may be disappointed or pained by the
result.

May I ask those who have not differed with me, to join with me in this
same spirit towards those who have? And now let me close by asking three
hearty cheers for our brave soldiers and seamen, and their gallant and
skilful commanders.